The course discusses the physical basis of solid-state semiconductor devices using both the phenomenon of injection of carriers through p-n transitions, and the phenomena associated with the field effect.

The first part of the course briefly presents basic information from solid state physics and semiconductor physics. This information is necessary in the future when mastering the basic material of the course. The second and third parts describe the physical basis associated with contact phenomena in Schottky barriers, electron-hole transitions and heterojunctions, as well as the basics of physics of the surface of semiconductors and MIS-structures. The fourth and fifth parts are devoted to the analysis of physical bases of work of semiconductor diodes and bipolar transistors. The sixth part is devoted to the analysis of the field-effect transistors. The seventh part is devoted to devices with negative differential resistance-thyristors.

The peculiarity of this course is that when discussing the physical principles of operation and parameters of devices, along with idealized characteristics, reference data are considered that show the real characteristics of a particular type of device.

As part of the course, students model various devices in the APSYS application of the company [Crosslight](https://crosslight.com/), which improves the quality of the presented material and allows students to more clearly understand the basic physical processes that occur in solid-state electronics devices.